George Washington - Battle of Trenton
General George Washington was with his little army near Fort Lee on the
Jersey shore. He was soon
disturbed by Lord Cornwallis, who, early on the morning of the 20th of
November, 1776 crossed the
Hudson from Dobb's Ferry to Closter's Landing, five miles above Fort Lee,
and with artillery climbed a
steep, rocky road to the top of the Palisades, unobserved by Greene. That
officer was told of his danger
by a farmer, who awoke him from slumber. Greene gave warning to
Washington, who ordered Lee to
cross the Hudson immediately and join him. Greene fled in haste from Fort
Lee, with two thousand men,
leaving behind cannon, tents, stores and camp equipage, and barely
escaping capture. Washington
covered the retreat of the garrison so effectually, that less than one
hundred stragglers were made
prisoners.
It was now suspected that the British would move on Philadelphia.
Washington, with his army led by
himself and reduced to less than four thousand men, marched toward the
Delaware to impede the
progress of the invader as much as possible. His force decreased at
almost every step. The patriotism of
New Jersey seemed to be paralyzed by the presence of a British army on
the soil. Hundreds of
republicans--even men who had been active in the patriot cause--signed a
pledge of fidelity to the British
crown. During the twelve days that Washington was making his way to the
Delaware, so closely
pursued by Cornwallis that the rear-guard of the Americans often heard
the music of the van-guard of
the royal troops, he was chilled by the seeming indifference of the
people. He halted at points as long as
possible, for Lee to join him and so give him strength to make a stand
against his pursuers; but that
officer, assuming that his was an independent command, paid no attention
to the order of his superior.
He was then evidently playing a desperate game of treason. Daily messages
to him, urging him to push
forward with his troops, did not affect him. He lingered long on the
Hudson, until many of his soldiers
had left him and gone home; and he tried to induce Heath to weaken his
force in the Highlands by
assigning for duty under Lee, two thousand of his men. Failing in this,
he moved slowly as far in the rear
of Washington as possible; and finally (eleven days after the chief had
reached the Delaware), he took
lodgings at Baskingridge in East Jersey, three miles from his camp, and
nearer the enemy. There, on the
morning of the 13th of December, he suffered himself to be captured by a
small British scout.
Lee had habitually treated Washington with superciliousness; and in
letters to Gates and others, who
would applaud his utterances, he would speak with contempt of the
commander-in-chief as "not a
heaven-born genius," and words of like import. He had just finished a
letter to Gates when the scout
appeared, in which he wrote most falsely: "A certain great man is most
damnably deficient He has
thrown me into a situation where I have my choice of difficulties; if I
stay in this province, I risk myself
and army; and if I do not stay, the province is lost forever," and so on.
This letter was not folded when
the scout came and summoned Lee to surrender. He went out unarmed,
bareheaded, in slippers, without
a coat, in a blanket cloak, his shirt-collar open and his linen much
soiled, and gave himself up. In this
plight he was hurried on horseback to the camp of Cornwallis, and was
afterward sent to New York.
Sullivan, who was next in command, took charge of the troops and pushed
on to the Delaware. Had
Lee obeyed the orders of Washington, Cornwallis could not have penetrated
New Jersey further than
Newark, for the disobedient officer had four thousand troops under his
command when he crossed the
Hudson, and might have joined Washington with them in less than three
days.
On the evening of the 1st of December, Washington fled from New Brunswick
after destroying a part of
the bridge over the Raritan there, and engaging in a contest with cannon
with his pursuers. It was
understood that Howe, who was about to send a part of his army to take
possession of Rhode Island,
had instructed Cornwallis not to pursue further than the Raritan. So
Washington left Lord Stirling at
Princeton with twelve hundred men, and with the remainder of his little
army (the New Jersey and
Maryland brigades had just left him), pushed on to the Delaware, at
Trenton. Having sent his baggage,
stores, and sick across the river into Pennsylvania, he turned back to
oppose the further progress of
Cornwallis, when, on the morning of the 6th, he met Stirling flying
before a greatly superior force. Howe
had sent troops under General Clinton to Rhode Island, borne by the ships
of Sir Peter Parker, and with
a considerable force had now joined Cornwallis; making an army four
thousand strong. With these they
were pressing on toward the Delaware. Washington was compelled to turn
back and seek safety, with
his little army, beyond the river. He crossed that stream on the 8th, and
before the arrival of the British
on its banks, he had seized or destroyed every boat on its waters and
those of its tributaries, along a line
of seventy miles.
Philadelphia was now trembling for its own safety. The Congress, in whom
there was a growing distrust
in the public mind, were uneasy. Leading republicans hesitated to go
further. Only Washington, who, at
the middle of December, when frost was rapidly creating a bridge across
the Delaware over which his
pursuers might pass, had not more than a thousand soldiers on whom he
could rely, seemed hopeful.
When asked what he would do if Philadelphia should be taken, he replied:
"We will retreat beyond the
Susquehanna River, and thence, if necessary, to the Alleghany mountains."
He had already conceived
the masterly stroke which sent a thrill of joy and hope through the
desponding heart of America, and
toward that end he worked. He sent Putnam to cast up defences around
Philadelphia, and stimulated the
Congress to vigorous action. They sent forth a strong appeal to the
people. A thorough reorganization of
the army was begun according to the plan adopted by the Congress. There
was to be one grand army,
composed of eighty battalions of seven hundred and fifty men each, to be
raised in the several States.
Liberal bounties were offered to soldiers who should re-enlist, and a
loan of ten million dollars from
France was authorized. Placing almost unlimited control of Philadelphia
in the hands of Putnam,
Congress, on the 12th (December, 1776), resolved to leave that city and
retire to Baltimore, at the same
time delegating their powers to a committee composed of Robert Morris,
George Clymer, and George
Walton to act in their behalf during their absence. On their departure
the loyalists became bold, and
there was much danger of a counter revolution in favor of the crown.
Informed that nearly all the Pennsylvanians were loyalists, and looking
with contempt upon the scattered
forces of Washington in that State, Cornwallis had cantoned his troops in
a careless manner in the
vicinity of the Delaware, left them in charge of General Grant, and
returned to New York. So confident
were the British leaders of their ability to capture Philadelphia at any
time, and end the rebellion by that
single blow, that Cornwallis was preparing to go to England, when events
called him back to New
Jersey.
Lee's division under Sullivan, and some regiments from Ticonderoga under
Gates, joined Washington on
the 21st of December. Inducements offered for re-enlistments had retained
nearly one-half of the
veterans. The Pennsylvania militia cheerfully responded to the call for
help, and on the day before
Christmas, Washington found himself at the head of an army between five
and six thousand in number.
He now felt strong enough to execute a plan which he had conceived, for
surprising and capturing a
force of the enemy stationed at Trenton, fifteen hundred in number,
composed chiefly of Hessian troops
under Colonel Rall. Washington expected the Germans, as was their custom,
would have a carousal on
Christmas day, and he fixed upon the succeeding night as a favorable time
for crossing the Delaware,
and falling upon them during their heavy slumbers before the dawn. Rall,
in his pride, had said: "What
need of intrenchments? Let the rebels come; we will at them with the
bayonet;" and he made the fatal
mistake of not placing a single cannon in battery.
At twilight on the appointed evening, Washington had two thousand men at
McConkey's Ferry (now
Taylorsville), a few miles above Trenton, with boats of every kind to
transport them across the river,
then filled with masses of thickening ice, for the weather was very cold.
With him were Generals
Sterling, Sullivan, Greene, Mercer, Stephen, and Knox, the latter
(commissioned brigadier-general two
days afterward) in command of artillerists, and about twenty pieces of
cannon. Arrangements had been
made for simultaneous movements against other British cantonments,
especially one from Bristol, with
about ten thousand men, which Gates was directed to lead. With wilful
disobedience, in imitation of Lee,
Gates refused the duty, turned his back on Washington on Christmas eve,
and rode on toward
Baltimore to intrigue in Congress for Schuyler's place in the Northern
Department.
The perilous voyage across the Delaware amid the floating ice was begun
early in the evening, and it was
four o'clock in the morning before the troops stood in marching order,
with all their cannon, on the New
Jersey shore. The current was swift, the ice was thickly strewn in it,
and the night was dark, for toward
midnight a storm of snow and sleet set in. The army moved in two columns-
-one led by Sullivan along
the road nearest the river, and the other commanded by Washington,
accompanied by Generals Stirling,
Greene, Mercer, and Stephen. It was broad daylight when they approached
Trenton, but they were
undiscovered until they reached the picket lines on the outskirts of the
village. The firing that followed
awakened Rall and his troops, who were hardly recovered from their
night's debauch. The colonel was
soon at the head of his men in battle order, but reeled like a man half
asleep. A sharp conflict ensued,
lasting only thirty-five minutes, when the Hessians were defeated and
dispersed, and Colonel Rall was
mortally wounded. The main body of his troops attempted to escape by the
Princeton road, when they
were intercepted by Colonel Hand. The affrighted Germans threw down their
arms and begged for
mercy. Some British light-horse and infantry at Trenton escaped to
Bordentown.
The victory for the Americans was complete. It would have been more
decisive had the co-operating
parties been able to perform their duties. They could not; and Washington
won all the glory of the
victory which greatly inspirited the patriots. In the engagements the
Americans did not lose a single man,
and had only two--William Washington (afterward distinguished in the
South) and James Monroe
(afterward President of the United States)--who were slightly wounded.
The spoils of victory were
almost a thousand prisoners, twelve hundred small arms, six brass field-
pieces, and all the German
standards. The triumphant army re-crossed the Delaware at McConkey's
Ferry, and before midnight of
the day of victory were back to their encampment.
This bold stroke of the American general puzzled and amazed the British
leaders, alarmed the Tories,
and dissipated the terror which had been felt in the presence of the
Hessians, as invincible troops. The
faltering militia soon flocked to the standard of Washington, and many of
the soldiers, who were about
to leave the American camp, re-enlisted. Cornwallis was sent back to New
Brunswick, where General
Grant was in command of the main British army in New Jersey, and the
other cantonments in that
province were broken up and the troops concentrated toward Trenton. Grant
moved forward to
Princeton, and Washington, who had resolved to attempt to drive the
British out of New Jersey, boldly
recrossed the river to the eastern side, and took post with his army at
Trenton, on the 30th of
December, 1776. The Congress, sitting at Baltimore, had invested him with
powers almost equal to
those of a Roman Dictator, for six months, authorizing him to reorganize
his army; appoint all officers
below brigadier-general; to make requisitions for subsistence and enforce
them with arms, and to arrest
the disaffected. Intending to remain on the eastern side of the Delaware,
he announced to the Congress,
while his army was crossing that stream, his intention "to pursue the
enemy and try to beat up their
quarters;" and he directed McDougall and Maxwell to collect troops at
Morristown, as a place of refuge
in case he should need one.
The low condition of the military chest would not allow Washington to pay
the bounties agreed to be
given, at the appointed time, and the commander-in-chief wrote to Robert
Morris, the great financier of
the Revolutionary period, for an immediate supply of hard money. The
Congress had just resolved to
issue bills to the amount of five million dollars immediately, but the
credit of that body was then very low,
even John Dickenson refusing to take the Continental money. The credit of
Robert Morris was high, and
confidence in him was unbounded. The sum asked for was large, and the
financier was perplexed with
doubts of his ability to obtain it. In a despondent mood he left his
counting-room at a late hour, musing,
as he walked in the street, on the subject of the requisition, when he
met a wealthy member of the
Society of Friends, who, at that time, were generally of the Tory faith
in politics. To this Friend, Morris
made known his wants. "Robert, what security canst thou give?" asked the
Quaker. "My note and my
honor," Morris replied. "Thou shalt have it," the Friend answered, and
the next day Morris wrote to
Washington: "I was up early this morning to dispatch a supply of fifty
thousand dollars to your
Excellency." Washington, in acknowledging its receipt, wrote that he had
engaged a number of the
eastern troops to stay six weeks beyond their term of enlistment, upon
giving a bounty of ten dollars.
"This, I know," wrote Washington, "is a most extravagant price when
compared with the time of
service;" but he thought it "no time to stand upon trifles."
The main army of Americans, about five thousand strong, were encamped on
the south side of the
Assanpink Creek at Trenton, when, toward evening on the 2nd of January
(1777), Cornwallis
approached from Princeton with a superior force of British regulars. They
had engaged in a series of
skirmishes on the way, and followed the Americans, who had attacked them,
to the margin of the
Assanpink. After trying to pass the guarded fords of that stream, they
halted and lighted fires; and
Cornwallis rested that night with the full assurance that he would make
an easy conquest of the
republican army the next day. "I will catch the fox in the morning," said
the Earl to Sir William Erskine,
who urged him to make an attack that night.
Washington's army were now in a very critical situation. A council of war
was held, when it was decided
to withdraw stealthily, at midnight, take a circuitous route to
Princeton, gain the rear of the British and
beat up their quarters there, and then fall upon their stores at New
Brunswick. But the ground, on
account of a thaw, was too soft to allow an easy transit for their forty
pieces of cannon. This gave
Washington much anxiety. While the council was in session, the wind
turned to the northwest, the
temperature suddenly fell, and by midnight the ground was frozen as hard
as a pavement. Along the front
of the American camp, fires had been lighted, and the British supposed
the republicans were slumbering.
Great was their surprise, multiplication and alarm, when, at dawn, they
discovered that the American
camp-fires were still burning but the army had departed, none knew
whither. All was silent and dreary
on the south side of the Assanpink, when suddenly there came upon the
keen wintry air, from the
direction of Princeton, the low booming of cannon. Although it was a cold
winter's morning, Cornwallis
thought the sound was the rumbling of distant thunder. The quicker all of
Erskine decided that it was the
noise of artillery, and exclaimed: "To arms, general! Washington has
outgeneralled us. Let us fly to the
rescue at Princeton!"
The American army, after sending their baggage to Burlington, had marched
from Trenton at one o'clock
in the morning of the 3d, leaving patrols to make their accustomed rounds
and men to keep the
camp-fires blazing until near the dawn, when they hurried after the
retreating army. By a circuitous march
the troops reached the neighborhood of Princeton below sunrise. Crossing
Stony Brook, the main army
wheeled to the right to have a back road to Princeton, while General
Mercer, with about three hundred
and fifty men, was sent to break down another bridge that spanned the
stream. Two regiments of
Colonel Mawhood's brigade had just started to join Cornwallis at Trenton,
and the one in advance, led
by the colonel in person, accompanied by three companies of dragoons,
first discovered Mercer. The
two parties, whose numbers were about equal, tried to gain a vantage
ground upon an eminence near.
Each had two field-pieces; and a sharp engagement was begun by Mawhood by
attacking Mercer with
his cannon. The firing was returned with spirit by Captain Neal with his
two pieces, while Mercer's
riflemen sent deadly volleys from behind a hedge fence. They were soon
furiously attacked with British
bayonets, and fled in disorder, the enemy pursuing, until, on the brow of
a hill, they discovered the
American regulars and Pennsylvania militia, under Washington, marching to
the support of Mercer. In
trying to rally the troops, Colonel Haslet of Delaware, and Captains Neal
and Fleming, were killed, and
General Mercer, whose horse had been disabled under him, was knocked down
by a British clubbed
musket, mortally wounded and left for dead.
Just at that moment Washington appeared, checked the flight of the
fugitives, and intercepted the march
of the other British regiment. He was assisted by the fire of Moulder's
artillery placed in battery. When
Mawhood saw Washington riding from column to column and bringing order
out of confusion, he halted,
and, drawing up his artillery, charged and attempted in vain to seize
Moulder's guns. The Pennsylvania
militia, who were first in line, began to waver at this onset, when
Washington, to encourage them and set
an example for all his troops, rode to the forefront of danger. For a
moment he was hidden by the
smoke of the musketry on both sides, and a shiver of dread lest he was
slain, ran through the army;
when he appeared, unhurt, a shout of joy rent the air. At that moment
Colonel Hitchcock came up with
a fresh force, and Hand's riflemen were turning the British left, when
Mawhood ordered a retreat. His
troops (the Seventieth regiment) field across the snow-covered fields and
over the fences, up Stony
Brook, leaving two brass field-pieces behind them. The Fifty-fifth
regiment, which had attempted to
reinforce them, were pressed back by the New England troops under Stark,
Poor, Patterson, Reed and
others, and were joined in their flight toward New Brunswick by the
Fortieth, who had not taken much
part in the action. A portion of a British regiment remained in the
strong, stone-built Nassau Hall of the
College at Princeton, which had been used for barracks. Washington
brought cannon to bear upon the
building, and the troops within soon surrendered. One of the cannon-balls
entered a window and passed
through the head of a portrait of George the Second in a frame that hung
on the wall of the Prayer-room.
A full-length portrait of Washington by Peale, now occupies that frame.
In this short but sharp battle, the British loss in killed, wounded and
prisoners, was about four hundred
and thirty. That of the Americans was light, excepting in officers.
Colonels Haslet and Potter, Major
Morris and Captains Shippen, Fleming and Neal, were slain. General Mercer
was taken to a house near
by, where he was tenderly nursed by a Quaker maiden and a colored woman
at the house of Thomas
Clarke. There he died nine days afterward in the arms of Major George
Lewis, a nephew of
Washington. Bye.
The number of lowercase characters are 15825